47% of
Americans eat one every day
and over 100 billion each year.
Whether you call it a
sub, a hoagie, or a hero,
it's an American staple.
Who doesn't love a sandwich?
Sandwich shops
are a $25 billion business.
But back in 1960, sub sandwiches
are a niche Italian food.
In the sixties, the
sandwich was two pieces
of white wonder bread.
Until two pairs
of upstarts enter a race
to change the way America eats.
He really brought the
idea of the sub to America.
Nobody does what Subway does.
And flip
the script on fast food.
Salad on a sandwich,
that's our specialty.
Subway was the
first fast food chain
to allow you to customize
to the extent that it does.
Giving rise to
the largest restaurant chain
on the planet.
We have a limited window
of opportunity here.
And
turning a humble food
into an American icon.
This is "Submarine Warfare."
In the mid 1960s, fast
food in America is emerging
as a prosperous industry
for the first time.
What started in
Southern California
with the McDonald's brothers,
has spread across all 50 states
with over 40,000 fast
food outlets nationwide.
Fast food was
in this boom time.
It was a gold rush.
There wasn't just
workers in urban centers,
families, all demographics
were eating there.
It was really food
for the people
in a way that attracted
crowds of all ages to come.
But at the time,
fast food is centered
around one menu item.
The burger.
The hamburger industry
was incredibly saturated.
There were a million hamburger
places across the country
and McDonald's of
course was dominating,
but people wanted
an alternative.
Savvy
entrepreneurs start introducing
new choices and alternatives
like Taco Bell,
Kentucky Fried Chicken,
and Pizza Hut start
to flood the scene.
People are increasingly
relying on convenience foods.
All of those foods have
dangerous numbers of calories.
We're living in a kind of
unhealthy food landscape
by that point.
Now a
$20 billion industry,
fast food's impact on the
American waistline is massive.
With the average man's weight
increasing by six pounds
in just five years,
leading the government
to make an unprecedented
move in 1964.
They recommend adults reduce
their daily food intake
by 300 calories.
This leaves Americans in need
of healthier food
options on the go.
But in Connecticut,
17 year old high school graduate
Fred DeLuca isn't thinking
about food at all.
He just needs money.
I'm so sorry I'm late.
It took me a minute
to find this place.
Fred DeLuca is a
really bright, driven,
ambitious young man.
What do you think?
He grows up in poverty in
the projects in the Bronx,
but still sets his
sight on medical school.
And he needs money
to go to school
to pursue these
dreams that he has.
I'm sorry.
Why am I here again?
Well, the other day at my
barbecue, you asked about money?
Yeah, to pay for college
and medical school.
I was just wondering
if you had some advice.
I do.
Start a business.
But I'm just a kid.
What kind of business
would I start?
Pete Buck was a family friend.
He was sort of like
an uncle unofficially.
He had barbecues
and frequently invited the
DeLucas over to his home.
Pete was a nuclear physicist
and has a entrepreneurial bent.
As he reads newspaper
articles and magazine articles
about different
businesses, he gets ideas.
Have you ever
heard of a submarine?
Yeah.
Like, like an underwater boat?
No.
Like the sandwich.
Never.
At the time,
sandwiches aren't a business
and are a far cry from
today's equivalent.
We live in a world now
where getting a long
sandwich is incredibly easy,
there's lots of variety.
But now go back when sliced
bread itself was fairly new,
sandwiches might be head
cheese, bologna and cheese,
butter and sugar, marmalade.
The US sandwich game
was kind of weak, right?
You look at a couple slices of
bread, maybe some cold cuts.
Seems a little anemic.
But while
most are homemade,
a new sandwich is arriving,
hidden in urban
Italian communities
across the Northeast.
The submarine sandwich.
Slice it into pieces
and people would just help
themselves to a little section.
They were regional,
they were local.
They were Italian finger food
long before they were
ever $5 foot longs.
In the sixties, these
were not popular sandwiches
unless you were in an
Italian neighborhood
where there was an Italian deli.
Most people didn't know
about this at the time.
The origin of submarine
sandwiches is something
that's kind of hotly debated.
One account says it came
from an Italian immigrant
named Dominic Conti from
my hometown of New York
and he began selling
Italian sandwiches
out of a deli he operated
in the earliest parts
of the 20th century.
Supposedly he named his sandwich
after a submarine
called the Fenian Ram,
which was used to
repel English invaders
in the latter half
of the 19th century.
You wanted my money
advice, so here's my offer.
I'll put up the money
to start the business.
$1,000.
You'll do a lot of the leg work.
When the money
starts rolling in,
you take half of the profits
and you set it aside
to pay for school.
Why me?
You're the only person
who hasn't said I'm nuts.
Okay.
Pete is a visionary
and he's got some money.
And why not do
something different
beyond being a
nuclear physicist?
When you have an entrepreneurial
urge, why not play it out?
Let's see what we can build.
Pete Buck has a
career in the sciences.
Fred wants one.
You have a bit of a mentor
that he has found in Pete Buck.
Two very intelligent,
scientifically minded men,
albeit from very
different generations.
So show me how to
make these submarines.
Oh, I don't know
how to do that.
Which is why our first
step is collecting data.
It's crazy that Fred and Pete
decide to create a business
that's going to sell a sandwich
that neither one of them
had ever made or eaten.
The first thing they've
gotta do is figure out,
what is a
submarine sandwich?
What does it taste like?
What does it look like?
How do you build these?
One day, Buck
and DeLuca's simple concept
will give rise to the biggest
restaurant chain in the world,
found in over 100 countries
with nearly double the amount
of US locations as McDonald's.
Worth over $10 billion
and selling over 5,000
sandwiches every minute.
But for now, they have no
idea that 70 miles away,
two high school friends have
more than a year's
head start on them.
So Tony Conza and Peter
DeCarlo are Jersey guys
and they would go down to
the Jersey shore to vacation.
While they're down there, they
see this submarine sandwich.
Conza sees an opportunity here.
It's unique, it's fresh,
and it's something that's
going to make me money.
At age 24,
Tony Conza and Peter
DeCarlo quit their jobs
and risk everything
to open a sandwich stand
they call Blimpie Base,
named after the shape of
the sandwiches they sell.
Tony Conza of
Blimpie is essentially
like the Wolf of Eat Street.
He's a Wall Street clerk and
he learned everything he knows
about business by watching
real Wall Street sharks.
Very slick, total entrepreneur.
Peter DeCarlo was a detail
guy, he was an implementer.
You know, he took Tony's
big ideas and said,
okay, this is how
we're gonna do it.
And we need this,
this, and this.
Conza
and DeCarlo's vision
for their sub
sandwich is unique.
They had the idea of
just stacking a sandwich
with a bunch of lettuce
and other greens.
It was layered with
tons of vegetables and oil
and vinegar and spices
drizzled on top.
This is a salad on a sandwich.
That's our specialty.
It's like two meals in one.
There you go.
This was something that was
fairly unusual at the time.
Priced at 75 cents,
Conza and DeCarlo hoped
to draw customers away
from fast food restaurants
like McDonald's
with their salad on a sandwich,
marketed as a healthier
alternative to burgers.
In the food world in America,
it's all about the marketing.
Blimpie came up at the same
time as Americans beginning
to sort of watch what they
eat and count their calories.
Blimpie understood what
Americans would want to eat.
You think like, yeah,
I'm making a healthy
choice by getting this.
The salad on a
sandwich concept takes off
with health conscious consumers.
It's the basis of
a restaurant chain
that will one day
boast 2,000 stores,
reach over half a billion
dollars in annual sales,
and revolutionize how fast food
is sold around the country.
But first, they need to
learn how to run a business
with an unproven product.
These guys have no
restaurant experience
and their lack of
restaurant experience begins
to show almost immediately.
There you go, sir, have
a good one, enjoy that.
They had to be
aware of their competition
and they simply weren't.
Hey, welcome to Blimpie's.
What can I get you?
Yeah, actually I'd like
your most popular sandwich.
For now, Fred
DeLuca doesn't pose a threat
to Blimpie, but a war of
innovation is beginning
and a race to be the
first to bring one
of America's most iconic
foods to the nation.
As the US economy
booms in the 1960s,
the demand for labor increases
and baby boomers begin working.
And in 1965, 22 million women
are now in the labor market,
a 35% increase from 1950,
making food on the go a
necessary convenience.
In Bridgeport, Connecticut,
Pete Buck and Fred
DeLuca are under pressure
to get their operation
up and running
and keep up with
the competition.
Okay.
But first they
need a sandwich to sell.
That is one from every
spot in the tri-state area.
Well, now we know
we're not the first.
We just have to be the best.
They don't know
what they're doing.
It was just let's go out
and sample some sandwiches
to get an idea of what we
need and how we do this.
They got analytical, they
broke down the sandwich.
They analyzed the
bread, the spread,
the main ingredients, and
the garnishes as well.
After getting
a taste of the competition,
Buck and DeLuca design a
set menu of seven sandwiches
built around meats
like salami and turkey,
priced at 69 cents each.
Hey, what are we
gonna call this place?
Oh, I thought of
the perfect name.
On
August 28th, 1965,
they opened Pete's Submarines.
Opening day of Pete's
Submarine sandwiches,
they sell out of everything.
This was the family
and friends coming out
to support Fred's
and Pete's business.
As the days wore on,
the line disappeared.
Hey!
What can we get for you?
Can I get a
small pizza please?
Oh, we don't serve pizza.
But isn't this Pizza Marines?
It's Pete's, that's
him, Submarines.
Pizza Marines, Pete's
Submarines, Pizza Marines!
Oorah!
Pizza Marines, that's what
they called it on the radio.
With sales
as low as $7 a day,
Buck and DeLuca don't
have the capital
to stay open much longer.
They could skimp
on paying themselves,
but just to pay for the
bread and the ingredients,
the produce and the meat, was
costly, just to pay the rent.
What are we gonna do?
Well, we could
make some changes,
see if things improve,
but we can't wing it.
To most people,
this would've been the
end of their business.
We need a control group.
A what?
In every scientific experiment,
you test things in
two different groups.
One group, you change,
the other, you don't.
The control group.
We need another sandwich shop
to see if our changes
are making a difference.
Shockingly, when anybody
else probably would say,
let's throw in the towel
and close this store,
they don't think
that way at all.
They were eager to experiment.
Wait.
Are you saying we should
open up a second store?
Yeah.
That's exactly what I'm saying.
Rather than collapse,
they go in a completely
opposite direction
that no one expected.
Think about that.
Facing extinction, they
open a second restaurant.
It's a huge risk.
While Buck
and DeLuca experiment,
in Hoboken, Blimpie is selling
their salad on a sandwich
to so many hungry
office workers.
A bit more lucrative than
our old summer jobs, huh?
That they
gamble their profits
on opening two more stores
within three months of
opening their first.
We have another
loan payment due,
not to mention utility bills.
All that money's
already spent, Tony.
Just wait till we have a few
dozen stores up and running.
We can barely keep up with
the three stores we have now.
Most people say
restaurants need years
to become profitable.
Tony Conza, like a year later,
he's already like this
is working, let's go.
He was ambitious and he pushed.
He pushed that envelope.
And while that's exciting,
that can cause problems.
One day, we are
gonna own 300 stores
and we are gonna be the biggest
sandwich chain in the world.
Maybe then you'll realize
what a moron you
sound like right now.
Your turn to lock up.
Blimpie
has broken new ground
becoming the nation's first
fast food sandwich chain,
and dozens of well
known names will follow.
But with cracks already
showing in their foundation,
the partners must see eye to eye
before they can
conquer the nation.
By 1968, there are over
250 fast food chains,
a 20-fold increase from
the postwar period.
This rapid expansion is
thanks to a tested strategy.
Franchising is a system
that the franchise
all puts together
and that system is then licensed
to a third party, a franchisee.
In exchange, they charge a fee.
In New Jersey,
Conza sets his sights on
taking Blimpie national
by using the strategy
and has plunged profits
into growing to 10 locations
across the Northeast.
Turkey supplier was just here
and apparently we owed
him a few thousand bucks.
I just had to pay him
outta the cash register.
If you don't
understand franchising,
you now have huge
amounts of problems.
That money was for
our loan payment.
We don't have enough money
to cover all these expenses.
So?
Any ideas?
They were losing
a lot of money
because they didn't
know quite how
to run an expanding business.
You know, money needed to
go back into advertising,
stores, and distribution.
So all of a sudden
they realized,
wow, we're selling tons of
sandwiches, why are we broke?
But that couldn't stop Conza.
Let's stop running
the stores ourselves.
We'll let somebody else
deal with the day to day.
That way we can
focus on expansion.
We have a limited window
of opportunity here.
That means moving fast and
seizing the market before-
Before anyone
else does, I know.
Our problem is we're
not making enough profit
from the stores we already have.
How does adding
stores solve that?
Do you have any better ideas?
Tomorrow, we start looking
for new franchisees.
Conza accelerates
Blimpie's expansion plan
to open 100 new stores
across the Northeast.
Conza wants to franchise
and grow the brand
across the country,
so he is selling off franchises
to anyone who wants one.
No discrimination.
You want a Blimpie's,
you get a Blimpie's.
Blimpie
introduces the sub sandwich
to new markets for
the very first time
and becomes the biggest
sandwich chain in the country
with no competition, for now.
Meanwhile, Buck and
DeLuca are gambling
what little money they have
left to open their second shop.
For nuclear
physicist, Pete Buck,
it's an expensive scientific
test to improve their operation
with a method known
as AB testing.
You try something at
location A that works
and then you try
something at location B.
You have a basis for comparison.
I think like most
good scientists,
they see challenges as
a puzzle to be solved.
And he applies that
methodical, experimental,
evaluative nature
to his business
even though it had never
really been applied
to the restaurant world.
They changed the
configuration of the store.
They'd make changes in
the hours of operation.
They'd use different bread,
different toppings
on sandwiches.
Their
breakthrough ideas include
moving profitable items,
such as chips and candy bars,
right by the register as
tempting add-ons for customers.
And expanding parking
to make it an easy place
for a quick pit stop.
But their biggest idea...
Pete, what if you
turn all the way around?
Is a groundbreaking
change not just for them,
but for the entire
food industry.
I can see what you're doing.
Feels more involved, like I'm
helping you make my sandwich.
While other
shops only offer a fixed menu
of sandwiches, Buck and DeLuca
begin allowing customers
to choose exactly how they
want their sandwiches made.
What they did was
so incredibly unique.
They allowed you to experience
the building of the sandwich.
And so not only were they
making you a sandwich fresh,
they were allowing you to
sort of choose and pick
and craft this thing
especially for you.
They may finally
have their winning formula,
save for one more
crucial change.
They knew that they needed
to rename their business
from Pete's Submarines
to something else.
You had someone from Connecticut
and someone from the Bronx.
People close enough
to New York City
to know about our iconic
mass transit system.
The subway.
In 1968, Buck
and DeLuca opened the doors
to the first ever
Subway restaurant.
Extra pickles,
please, and no mayo.
You got it.
Would you like for me to cut it?
No thanks.
Subway's new
customizable system is a smash
and inspires fast food
chains for decades to come.
I mean, Burger King said
you could have it your way,
but you don't get to
look at the ingredients.
This was the first place to
have it all laid out there
for the consumer to pick.
I want turkey, I want
lettuce, I want green pepper,
I want this and so forth,
and move along that line,
which has now been imitated
by so many other competitors.
These weren't
restaurateurs to begin with.
These were scientists.
So by the time they
were ready to scale up
and become a major
chain, it was perfect.
Buck
and DeLuca are ready
to unleash their sandwich shop
model across the Northeast.
But while they still have a
distance to catch their rivals,
Blimpie's aggressive expansion
push is proving costly.
Blimpie had problems
with quality control.
They had sort of
given franchises
to whoever would sign
up for a franchise
and they didn't
really monitor them.
There was not a lot of
consistency in management
or in cleanliness or product.
So you never knew
what you were getting.
With the company's
reputation in free fall,
sales plunge.
Location after
location was failing
and now they found
themselves severely in debt.
Like forget about Blimpie,
this is much more
Hindenberg-like.
Now a
decade after it began,
the high school
friends' partnership
is at a breaking point.
Here's a contract.
If you sign, that means
we're splitting Blimpie
into two different companies.
There's no way any partnership
in restaurant or
otherwise can work
if both partners are
thinking different things,
want to go in
different directions.
I keep all the New
York area stores?
Yes.
And then I'm free to keep
expanding into new territories
without anything or
anyone holding me back.
So they each go
their separate ways now
with their own
regions of Blimpie,
which if you're trying to keep
your franchises consistent,
this is a recipe for disaster.
While Blimpie and
its 100 shops are fractured,
Buck and DeLuca's formula
is paying dividends
as the chain grows rapidly
and hits 32 stores by 1976.
But as they gear up to
push west and south,
Subway's expansion hits a snag
when they can no longer
source a critical ingredient.
In those early years, Fred
would actually go buy bread
and deliver it to
the franchisees.
At one point, though,
someone wanted to open
a Subway in Maryland,
more than an hour or two
away from Connecticut.
One of the big issues is,
where you gonna get the bread?
Blimpie is
still ahead in the race
to bring sub
sandwiches nationwide,
but Subway is about to
unleash a new innovation
that might finally, after
more than a decade of chasing,
catapult them ahead.
It's 1978
and Subway's expansion
beyond the Northeast
suddenly stops.
Without enough local
Italian providers
to meet demand for bread,
Buck and DeLuca are forced
to sacrifice authenticity
and turn to national
wholesale bakeries,
testing Subway sandwich recipes
with mass market options.
This one's too crusty.
That one's too soggy.
Always you and the bread, man.
That's the first part
of the sandwich you touch.
The first part that
hits your mouth.
My mother, when
she makes bread,
the smell would fill
up the entire house.
Made us hungry.
Why don't we make our own bread?
I mean, no one else
is doing that, right?
Not Blimpie, not anybody.
We'd have to put an
oven in every location.
Yeah, but the
smell would hit 'em
as soon as they
walk in the doors.
At a time
when every fast food
restaurant outsources baking
of their buns, Buck and
DeLuca take out huge loans
to retool their stores,
installing ovens and hoods
and rewiring the electricity
in every one of their
100 stores adds up
to over $450,000
or 2 million today.
It's an expensive gamble,
with the company's
growth riding on it.
Back in New York, DeCarlo
works night and day
to maintain consistency in
his 100 Blimpie locations.
Pragmatic DeCarlo, he wants
to improve the locations
that already exist instead
of adding new ones.
Meanwhile, Tony Conza,
seeing the success of Subway,
he wanted to do something big.
Conza
makes a bold move
to pull further ahead of Subway
and opens 200 new franchises
in uncharted territory.
Tony looked at the South
as a huge space to grow in.
He really brought the idea
of the sub to America.
And a lot of people
don't realize that.
He'd introduced the
rest of the country
to the salad in a sandwich.
Despite
cementing their position
as the country's
largest sandwich chain,
Conza and DeCarlo's broken
partnership takes its toll.
Losing Peter DeCarlo, Tony
really lost his details guy.
Peter, he really lost
the big ideas guy.
You can imagine, after
a decade together,
these gentlemen had a shorthand
and you can't just hire
another guy to come in
and know your shorthand.
It doesn't work like that.
While
Blimpie remains divided,
Subway now has new five rack
ovens in every location.
Now they don't have to worry
about relying on a bakery.
The store can make
its own bread.
The new
ovens produce one
of Subway's most
signature attractions,
pulling in hungry
customers from the street.
An added advantage
was this whole idea
that goes along with
grandma's house,
that you're arriving at a place
where you smell
the bread baking.
It's a place you
want to go back to.
It makes you happy.
It's inconceivable to me
that anybody would not
like the smell of Subway.
I would say it's one of the
great unifiers of humanity.
Subway's
freshly baked bread is a hit
that propels them past
Blimpie for the first time,
hitting 600 locations from
coast to coast by 1984.
Yeah.
They are now
the go-to affordable
sandwich option
for Americans
around the country.
I had an office job
where I was in charge
of ordering lunch.
And you know how I kept
everything in check,
how I wrangled it in?
Hey guys, we're doing Subway.
Subway is cheap, it's popular.
People absolutely have a
need for that kind of thing.
So that's Subway.
Subway's rapid
rise attracts attention
from the media and
business worlds,
catapulting young founder Fred
DeLuca into the spotlight.
By the 1980s, you've got
Subway and you've got Blimpie
and it starts to become
a little antagonistic
because Subway starts throwing
some mud in the press.
But you weren't the first
sandwich shop on the block.
What about Blimpie?
They were around before
you, weren't they?
Yes, they were.
And the sandwiches that
they make are fine.
Nobody does what Subway does.
More options means
more for your money.
And the difference is delicious.
Fred DeLuca fired
some opening shots
at Blimpie in the press.
He actually told
the New York Times
that Subway was by far
a superior sandwich,
having tasted the
Blimpie sandwich.
Plus he said that they
would get a better product
and they would get
more for their money.
Blimpie, they're doing things
sort of three different ways.
Subway's just got
this very focused plan
and they're doing it one way.
And that tells Tony something,
that maybe something
needs to change.
Unwilling to
settle for second best,
Tony Conza has a big
idea to strike back.
We gotta talk.
By the mid 1980s,
Blimpie and Subway have
transformed sandwiches
into a lucrative business.
And their success gives rise
to a slew of competition
across the nation.
Blimpie and Subway
were the originators
of the fast food
sub sandwich chain.
Now we also have Firehouse Subs,
we have Jimmy John's,
and so many more.
New sandwich
chains bring new ideas.
Jimmy John's introduces
sandwich delivery in Illinois
and Quiznos starts toasting
their subs in Colorado.
With fierce competition
entering the race,
Conza and DeCarlo's division
of Blimpie has put them at risk
of falling further
behind Subway.
Conza felt, hey,
we were here first.
We're Italians from Jersey.
This is our culture,
this is our sandwich.
We were doing it,
we were successful.
How dare this upstart brand
from Connecticut approach
our success and beat it?
We are losing and
we need to win.
We can't go on like this.
I know.
You're right.
Subway's killing us.
These guys realize
that they've screwed up,
that they need to come together
or else Subway's just gonna
completely devour them.
So what's your plan?
Conza and DeCarlo
reunite to take on Subway.
Even if you don't really
get along with your partner,
when an opposing team
starts beating you,
that's the time to close
ranks and join forces again
against your common enemy.
Well, I've been thinking
about what Subway isn't doing.
Okay.
I've got an idea.
McDonald's has the Big Mac,
Burger King has the Whopper.
One of the ways that Blimpie
decides they're gonna hit back,
they need a signature sandwich.
Signature
items on fast food menus
have been a crucial
draw for customers
since Burger King introduced
the Whopper in 1957.
Everywhere else
had hamburgers,
Burger King had the Whopper,
and that's what made it special.
That became its calling card.
McDonald's
follows suit with the Big Mac
in 1968 and other
restaurants are close behind.
Pizza Hut introduces
its signature pan pizza
and Taco Bell debuts the
Enchirito, both in 1973.
Can you imagine McDonald's
without the Big Mac?
Having that signature sandwich
definitely is important
to the growth of a restaurant
for the customer
to have a reference
of why am I going in there?
But at the time,
neither Subway nor
Blimpie has names
for any of their sandwiches.
Until now.
Conza's unique creation
is their largest sub yet
and they dub it
the Blimpie Best.
So they come up with
a soft foot long roll,
with slow-cured ham, salami,
capicola, prosciuttini,
provolone, topped with
onions, tomatoes, lettuce,
and oil and vinegar and oregano.
It's got everything.
In 1984,
Conza and DeCarlo roll out
the Blimpie Best across
their 300 stores.
They have a
signature sandwich,
an eye catching sandwich
that gives them a critical
degree of success.
It was arguably one of
the largest sandwiches
that anyone had ever seen.
And being that Fred
DeLuca had said
that the Subway sandwich
was a greater value,
it's hard to top a sandwich
that has a full salad's
worth of vegetables
and a full charcuterie board
full of meat on one sandwich.
Sales
of the Blimpie Best
take the nation by storm.
It drives DeCarlo and Conza
to open 370 new stores
in the span of six years
and closes the gap on Subway.
Have you seen this?
Even though Fred DeLuca
is a deeply ambitious guy,
he's not someone to
leap without looking.
He has always used intelligence
to approach any obstacle
that life had set
in front of him.
DeLuca fights back
with his own signature sandwich,
rolling it out nationwide
with an unprecedented
marketing campaign,
aptly named the BMT.
It claims to be the
biggest, meatiest,
tastiest sandwich on the market.
Subway had to
rise to the occasion
and meet and beat
the competition.
The emphasis being on meat.
The sandwich adds
three double portions of meat
and unlimited custom
veggie toppings,
making it bigger than
the Blimpie Best.
It's big, it's delicious,
and it has value.
Three things that American
diners love to this day.
Subway's
new sandwich is a hit,
driving sales to 100
million a year in 1985.
I think that was one
of the great strengths
of the development
of Subway is that
Fred was always a step ahead
of understanding how to
develop and dominate markets.
Subway did that better than
any of the competition.
While DeLuca
and Buck grow Subway
to over 1,800 locations
across the country,
Tony Conza is planning
one last Hail Mary
in the fight for sub dominance,
a move that will take sandwiches
further than ever before.
By 1989, Blimpie is
desperate for a new avenue
to keep up with Subway's
astronomical growth
and Tony Conza has
a revolutionary plan
to accelerate expansion.
If we can shrink down to
a tiny footprint like this,
we can fit a Blimpie
into gas stations.
Gas stations?
Yes.
Hotel lobbies, office
buildings, college campuses.
Blimpie Express.
They've figured out a way,
with minimal real estate,
they can fit their operation,
at least the key elements of it,
into these very small spaces.
With this tiny footprint,
there's almost no
overhead expenses.
Exactly.
This sort of low
cost, low space,
low resource intensive version
of Blimpie, Blimpie Express,
really allows them to grow
and suddenly now they're able
to start expanding
more and more and more.
Let's see Subway
fit one of their ovens
in a space that small.
Conza and DeCarlo
invest all their profits
into launching mini stores
branded as Blimpie Express.
In 1994, they debut
across the country.
So suddenly you could
run into your corner store
where you would pick up milk
or chips or a pack of smokes
and get a sandwich.
Then you could
suddenly get sandwiches
by the side of the highway,
by the side of your
everyday street.
You didn't need to go
into a Blimpie location.
The Blimpie locations
came to you.
It allows 'em to
get into communities
that don't have fast foods
restaurant operations
and it starts to feel like,
oh, now we found a way,
this is sort of our secret
weapon to compete with Subway
and we can really get back
into the game that way
and into the fight.
With startup costs
just $35,000 per location,
the shrewd business
move drives Blimpie
to nearly quadruple in size,
reaching 2,000 stores by 2002
and propelling sales to
over $400 million annually.
Blimpie's express model
is the first of its kind
and inspires chains like
Dunkin' Donuts, Pizza Hut,
and even Subway to follow suit.
But despite the
groundbreaking expansion,
Blimpie falls short
of catching Subway.
So what do you take away
from Blimpie in this war?
Like they lost the war,
but did they really lose?
They've got 2,000 stores in
the country bringing them up
to the upper echelon of fast
food operations in the country.
Tony Conza achieves his dream.
Not only that, Blimpie really
brought America the sub.
Conza and DeCarlo
retire as millionaires,
cementing their legacy in
the fast food industry.
But Subway's relentless
franchising operation brings
the sub sandwich to
every corner of America.
I think that in the
development of Subway
and the explosion of
stores within easy reach
of every home, every office.
- Cheers.
Convenience is always
a big theme in America
and in how we live our lives.
This is about convenience.
And again, this is about
giving the American worker,
whether blue collar
or white collar,
an option that we
didn't have before.
By 2011,
Subway becomes the world's
largest restaurant chain,
even surpassing McDonald's with
over 40,000 locations today.
Both Pete Buck and Fred
DeLuca retire as billionaires.
At the time of
his death in 2015,
DeLuca's net worth was
estimated at over $3.5 billion,
all born from a deal
made as a teenager
with a family friend.
But just as McDonald's spawned
a lot of hamburger chains,
Subway did that same thing
for the sub sandwich.
All that came about
because Pete Buck said
to this 17 year old kid,
I'll give you $1,000
if you go find a
store and open it
and start selling
sub sandwiches.
Wow.
These were deeply
intelligent men
to whom the submarine
sandwich shop was a problem
to be solved.
It was a brand new thing,
something unlike any
American had seen.
It evoked abundance,
variety, deliciousness,
and that curiosity is what's
propelled this sandwich
that's as long as my arm into
the food folklore of America.